Below Info is From: http://cusp.nyu.edu/privacy-book/
Login Info for That Site Available at: https://github.com/ecitizen/chapter/blob/master/authors-website 
-----


PROPOSED BOOK AND CONFERENCE
CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS 
IN THE USE OF BIG DATATHEORY AND PRACTICAL APPROACHES

GOAL
The goal of the book is to identify ways in which vast new sets of data on human beings can be collected, integrated, and analysed to improve urban systems and quality of life while protecting confidentiality. It seeks to provide both a theoretical and practical foundation which cities across the world can draw from in establishing their data access rules and data security procedures.

The book is expected to have the same influence as the previous Confidentiality, Disclosure and Data Access: Theory and Practical Applications for Statistical Agencies, coedited by Pat Doyle, Julia Lane, Laura Zayatz and Jules Theeuwes, North Holland, 2001.

The conference is intended to act as a means to promote and disseminate the information contained within the book, as well as to build a community of practice that includes city urban planners, the new public-private research centers that are building urban data infrastructures, and the privacy and confidentiality research community.

SPONSORSHIP
The primary sponsor is NYU’s Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP). Additional sponsors include the American Statistical Association and its Privacy and Confidentiality subcommittee, as well the Research Data Centre of the German Federal Employment Agency.

BACKGROUND
Big data mean that a new analytical paradigm is open to statisticians and social scientists (Hey, Tansley, & Tolle, 2009). The statistical community has moved beyond survey and even administrative data to begin to understand how data can be mined from social media to capture national sentiment, from cellphone data to understand anti-government uprisings, and from financial data to examine swings in the economy. The funding opportunities are also there, viz. the White House “Big Data” initiative. And the need to use such data is apparent from the establishment of the CUSP as well as the institution of the Consumer Finance Protection Board, as well as the interest of federal statistical agencies. But the excitement of being able to access and analyze large amounts of micro data on human beings should be tempered by a commitment to minimize the threats to individual privacy and confidentiality.

Pushing the metaphor further, the current state of “big data” for the research community is still the Wild West. As order and analytical rigor is brought to the new data frontier, we should ensure that the future structure of data access ensures that the goal of good science is attained while protecting confidentiality.

There is a great deal of research that can be used to inform the development of such a structure, but it has been substantially siloed into separate activities in different research areas – statistics, cybersecurity, cryptography – as well as a variety of different practical applications, including the successful development of remote access secure data enclaves. There has also been a great deal of research on the features of reproducible science, particularly in the computer science and legal community.

DRAFT BOOK OUTLINE AND TIMELINE
We propose to follow the same approach used successfully production of a set of white papers that can be used to inform big data policy and a book aimed at having the same influence as the previous Confidentiality, Disclosure and Data Access: Theory and Practical Applications for Statistical Agencies, coedited by Pat Doyle, Julia Lane, Laura Zayatz and Jules Theeuwes, North Holland, 2001. Each author will be asked to submit an abstract, a first draft and a second draft.
