

--
Chapter 12: The Operational Framework: Institutional Controls
FIRST DRAFT: SEPTEMBER 7, 2013

Daniel "Dazza" Greenwood MIT
Arek Stopczynski, DTU
Brian Sweatt, MIT
Alex “Sandy” Pentland, MIT


Context and Conceptual Framework

To realize the promise and prospects of big data and avoid it’s security and confidentiality perils, institutions are updating operational frameworks governing business, legal and technical dimensions of their organization and it's interactions with the outside world.  A balanced set of institutional controls are needed to achieve operational frameworks of this nature. These institutional controls must support and reflect greater user control over personal data and also large scale interoperability for data sharing between and among institutions. Core capabilities of these controls include responsive rules-based systems governance and fine grained authorizations for distributed rights management.

The New Realities of Living in a Big Data Society

Sustaining a healthy, safe and efficient society is a scientific and engineering challenge that goes back to the 1800s, when the Industrial Revolution spurred rapid urban growth and created huge social and environmental problems. The remedy then was to build centralized networks that delivered clean water and safe food, enabled commerce, removed waste, provided energy, facilitated transportation and offered access to centralized healthcare, police and educational services. 

But these century-old solutions are increasingly obsolete. We have cities jammed with traffic, world-wide outbreaks of disease that are seemingly unstoppable and political institutions that are deadlocked and unable to act. In addition, we face the challenges of global warming, uncertain energy, water, and food supplies, and a rising population that will require building one thousand new cities of a million people each in order just to stay even.

But it doesn’t have to be this way. We can have cities that are protected from pandemics, that are energy efficient, have secure food and water supplies, and have much better government. To reach these goals, however, we need to radically rethink our approach. Rather than static, fixed systems that are separated by function – water, food, waste, transport, education, energy, and so on – we must consider them as dynamic, data driven systems. Instead of focusing only on access and distribution, we need dynamic, networked, self-regulating systems that are driven by the needs and preferences of the citizens. 

To ensure a sustainable future society, we must use our new technologies to create a `nervous system’ that maintains the stability of government, energy, and public health systems around the globe. Currently, our digital feedback technologies are capable of creating a level of dynamic responsiveness that our larger, more complicated modern society requires. We must reinvent societies’ systems within a control framework: sensing the situation, then combining these observations with models of demand and dynamic reaction, and finally using the resulting predictions to tune the system to match the demands being made of it.  

The engine that will drive this new nervous system is big data: the newly ubiquitous digital data now available about all aspects of human life.   By analyzing patterns of human experience and idea exchange within the `digital breadcrumbs’ that we all leave behind us as we move through the world – call records, credit card transactions, and GPS location fixes, among others. These data tell the story of your life by recording what you have chosen to do. And this is very different than what you put on Facebook; your postings on Facebook are what you choose to tell people, edited according to the standards of the day. Who you actually are is more accurately determined by where you spend your time and which things you buy not just what you say that you do .   

The process of analyzing the patterns within these digital breadcrumbs is called `reality mining’, and through reality mining we can tell an enormous amount about who you are. The Human Dynamics research group at MIT have found that we can use them to tell if you are likely to get diabetes, or whether you are the sort of person who will pay back loans. And by analyzing these patterns across many people, we are discovering that we can begin to explain many things – crashes, revolutions, bubbles – that previously appeared to be random `acts of God’. For this reason the magazine Technology Review named our development of reality mining as one of the ten technologies that will change the world.

The Role of Institutional Controls

The phrase "institutional controls" refers to safeguards and protections by use of legal, policy, governance and other non-strictly technical, engineering or mechanical measures .  Currently, this approach is most commonly reflected technically as some form of ‘enterprise controls" [fn.1] related to security and legally as "regulatory compliance" [fn.2].  The use of institutional controls of this type are fundamental methods for achieving and maintaining the transition to a digital, networked and big data footing for any private company, government agency or other organization.  

Consider the analogy of institutional controls in the context of environmental law, and how these types of measures can be applied in the big data, privacy and access context to digital environments.  In the context of land, institutional controls for environmental regulatory compliance with waste management cleanup requirements could include restrictions on land use attached to a property deed, an enforceable consent order or regulations and zoning rules.[fn1]

The concept of an "institutional control boundary" is especially clarifying and powerful when applied to the networked and digital boundaries of an institution.  In the context of Florida's environmental regulation frameworks, the phrase is applied to describe the various types of combinations risk management levels related to target cleanup standards and extend beyond the area of a physical property boundary.[fn2]  


The EPA provides considerable information on the nature and use of institutional controls, including situations when the situational scope extends to adjacent properties owned by third parties.[fn3]  When institutional controls would apply to "separately owned neighboring properties" a number of issues arise.  Engagement with affected third parties, requiring the party responsible for site cleanup to use "best efforts" to attain agreement by third parties to institute the relevant institutional controls, use of third party neutrals to resolve disagreements regarding the application with institutional controls or forcing an acquisition of the neighboring land by forcing the party responsible to purchase the property of by purchase of the property directly by the EPA.[fn4]


In the context of big data, privacy and access, internal controls will take the form of governance safeguards, business practices, legal contracts, technical security and many other measures.  Specifically, the example of "living consent" described below, demonstrates how institutional controls in concert with technical methods can result in a higher level of performance while appropriately balancing legitimate interests of various parties regarding use and access to personal data...

The use of system rules and integrated participation agreements for developers and end-users is another way to track operational frameworks to institutional controls.  A governance body that approves updates or exceptions to system rules can.... 

#FootNotes (not correlated yet!)

[fn.1] See Secure Data Access Anywhere And Anytime 
Current Landscape And Future Outlook Of Enterprise Mobile Security 
October 2012, by Forrester Consulting, http://www.juniper.net/us/en/local/pdf/industry-reports/secure-data-access.pdf section "Enterprise Mobility Outlook — Mobility Enters A Strategic Planning Stage" at 15 "Enterprise mobility technologies, especially those designed to retrofit enterprise controls on top of consumer mobile devices, are rapidly evolving. This was a message we heard loud and clear in the study." This study and analysis also reveals much about the internal controls needed to accomodate mobile device use by employees.  In both capacities as employee, consumer and other roles, the use of mobile devices triggers myriad legal, policy and other implications for institutional controls.  

[fn.2] Legal and regulatory frameworks such as HIPAA and Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) require covered organizations to established integrated sets of governance, legal, transactional, security and other internal controls to avoid violating the rules. The institutional controls are accomplished in tight integration with engineering and other measures in order to ensure compliance and to control legal and security risk.  

[fn2] See, FDEP, Division of Waste Management, Institutional Controls Procedures Guidance at 22 (Nov. 2010), available at www.dep.state.fl.us/waste/quick_topics/publications/wc/csf/icpg.pdf ""...RMO III does contemplate contamination beyond the Property boundaries, which would require agreement by the adjacent owners to put an RC on their properties as well."

See also: Final Technical Report: Development of Cleanup Target Levels (CTLs) for Ch. 62-777, F.A.C., at 134, available at http://www.dep.state.fl.us/waste/quick_topics/publications/wc/FinalGuidanceDocumentsFlowCharts_April2005/TechnicalReport2FinalFeb2005(Final3-28-05).pdf "Risk Management Options Level III, like Level II, allows concentrations above the default groundwater CTLs to remain on site. However, in some rare situations, the institutional control boundary at which default CTLs must be met can extend beyond the site property boundary."

[fn3] See, generally, EPA Hazardous Waste Corrective Action Guidance on Institutional Controls, http://www.epa.gov/epawaste/hazard/correctiveaction/resources/guidance/#InstitutionalControls 

Also see: Institutional Controls Bibliography: Institutional Control, Remedy Selection, and Post-Construction Completion Guidance and Policy, December 2005, http://www.epa.gov/superfund/policy/ic/guide/biblio.pdf 

[fn4] See:  Institutional Controls: A Guide to Planning, Implementing, Maintaining, and Enforcing Institutional Controls at Contaminated Sites, December 2012, at pg 16, Section 4.4 ICs and Landowners, http://www.epa.gov/superfund/policy/ic/guide/Final%20PIME%20Guidance%20December%202012.pdf 


The New Deal on Data

The digital breadcrumbs we leave behind provide clues about who we are and what we want. That makes these personal data immensely valuable, both for public goods and for private companies. As European Consumer Commissioner Meglena Kuneva said recently, “Personal data is the new oil of the internet and the new currency of the digital world .” This new ability to see the details of every interaction, however, can be used for good or for ill. Therefore maintaining protection of personal privacy and freedom is critical to our future success as a society.

A successful data driven society must be able to guarantee that our data will not be abused – and perhaps especially that government will not abuse the power conferred by access to such fine-grain data. To achieve the positive possibilities of a data driven society, we require what I have called the New Deal on Data – workable guarantees that the data needed for public goods are readily available while at the same time protecting the citizenry. We must develop much more powerful and sophisticated tools for privacy and reach a consensus that allows us to use personal data to both build a better society and to protect the rights of the average citizen.

A key insight that motivates the creation of a New Deal on Data is that your data are worth more when shared, because these aggregated data inform improvements in systems such as public health, transportation, and government. For instance, we have demonstrated that data about the way you behave and where you go can be used to minimize the spread of infectious disease.   Our research has reported how we were able to use these digital breadcrumbs to track the spread of influenza from person to person on an individual level. And if you can see it, you can stop it. In this instance, the result of sharing your personal data is that we can build a world where the threat of infectious pandemics is greatly diminished. 

Similarly, if you're worried about global warming, these shared, aggregated data now show us how patterns of mobility relate to productivity. In turn, this provides us with the ability to design cities that are both more productive and at the same time more energy efficient. But in order to be able to obtain these results and make a greener world, you need to be able to see the people moving around; this depends on many people being willing to contribute their data, even if only anonymously and in aggregate. 

While concrete examples such as better health systems and more energy efficient transportation systems motivate a New Deal on Data, there is an even greater public good that can be achieved by efficient and safe data sharing. To enable sharing of personal data and experiences, we also need secure technology and regulation that allow individuals to safely and conveniently share personal information with each other, with corporations, and with government. Consequently, the heart of a New Deal on Data must be to provide both regulatory standards and financial incentives that entice owners to share data while at the same time serving the interests of both individuals and society at large. We must promote greater idea flow among individuals, not just corporations or government departments.

Unfortunately, today most personal data are siloed off in private companies and therefore largely unavailable. Private organizations collect the vast majority of personal data in the form of location patterns, financial transactions, phone and internet communications, and so on. These data must not remain the exclusive domain of private companies, because then the data are less likely to contribute to the common good. Thus, these private organizations must be key players in the New Deal on Data’s framework for privacy and data control. Likewise, these data should not become the exclusive domain of the government, because this will not serve the public interest of transparency and we should be suspicious of trusting the government with such power.

Personal Data: Emergence of a New Asset Class

It has long been recognized that the first step to promoting liquidity in land and commodity markets is to guarantee ownership rights   so that people can safely buy and sell. Similarly, the first step toward creating greater idea and idea flow (`idea liquidity’) is to define ownership rights . The only politically viable course is to give individual citizens rights over data that are about them and in fact, in the European Union these rights flow directly from the constitution. We need to recognize personal data as a valuable asset of the individual that is given to companies and government in return for services .  

The simplest approach to defining what it means to “own your own data” is to draw an analogy with the English common law ownership rights of possession, use, and disposal:

• You have the right to possess data about you. Regardless of what entity collects the data, the data belong to you, and you can access your data at any time. Data collectors thus play a role akin to a bank, managing the data on behalf of their “customers.”

• You have the right to full control over the use of your data. The terms of use must be opt-in and clearly explained in plain language. If you are not happy with the way a company uses your data, you can remove the data, just as you would close your account with a bank that is not providing satisfactory service. 

• You have the right to dispose of or distribute your data. You have the option to have data about you destroyed or re¬deployed elsewhere. 

Individual rights to personal data must be balanced with the need of corporations and governments to use certain data – account activity, billing information, and so on – to run their day-to-day operations. This New Deal on Data therefore gives individuals the right to possess, control, and dispose of copies of these required operational data, along with copies of the incidental data collected about you such as location and similar context. 

Note that these ownership rights are not exactly the same as literal ownership under modern law, but the practical effect is that disputes are resolved in a different, simpler manner than would be the case for (as an example) land ownership disputes.

In 2007, one author (Pentland) first proposed the New Deal on Data to the World Economic Forum. Since then, this idea has run through various discussions and eventually helped shape the 2012 Consumer Data Bill of Rights in the United States, along with a matching declaration on Personal Data Rights in the EU. These new regulations hope to accomplish the combined trick of breaking data out of the current silos, thus enabling public goods, while at the same time giving individuals greater control over data about them. But, of course this is still a work in progress and the battle for individual control of personal data rages onward.

Enforcing the New Deal on Data 

How can we enforce this New Deal? The threat of legal action alone is important, but insufficient, because if you can’t see abuses then you can’t prosecute them. Moreover, who wants more lawsuits anyway?  Enforcement can be addressed in significant ways without prosecution of public statute or regulation at all.  In many fields, companies and governments rely upon multi-party frameworks of agreed rules governing common business, legal and technical practices to create effective self-organization and enforcement.  These approaches hold promise as a method for using institutional controls  to form a reliable operational framework balancing the needs for big data, privacy and access. 

One current best practice is a system of data sharing called trust networks. Trust networks are a combination of networked computers and legal rules defining and governing expectations regarding data.  With respect to data belonging to individuals, these networks of technical and legal rules keeps track of user permissions for each piece of personal data, and a legal contract that specifies both what you can and can’t do with the data and what happens if there is a violation of the permissions. For example, in such a system all personal data can have attached labels specifying what the data can, and cannot, be used for. These labels are exactly matched by the network's system rules and terms in legal contracts between all the participants stating penalties for not obeying the permission labels.  These rules can, and often do, reference or require audits of relevant systems and data use, demonstrating how traditional internal controls can be leveraged as part of the transition to more novel trust models. 

Complete tracking and regulation of every aspect of a trust network is not the goal or even desirable in order to achieve effective enforcement.  Rather, the rules for a trust network align encorcement with the highest priority issues abnd those upon which trust of participants is premised. The relevant issues arise from the dynamics of data flows, underlying trust models and contextual scenarios within which the networked data and the relationships of parties in the trust network.  When a trust network involves use of personal data, then the user permissions and corresponding limits on use are fundamental to the trust model.  In this context, the permissions, including the provenance of the data, should require appropriate levels of audit.  A well designed trust network, elegantly integrating computer and legal rules, allows automatic auditing of data use and allows individuals to change their permissions and withdraw data.  

Having system rules applicable to the networks, applications and data as well as all the services providers other intermediaries, and the users themselves is the mechanism for establishing and operating a trust network.  System rules are sometimes called operating regulations in the credit card context, or known as trust frameworks in the identity federations context, or trading parter agreements in a supply value chain context.  There are many general examples of multiparty shared architectural and contractual rules that share the generic characteristic of creating binding obligations and enforceable expectations on all participants in scalable networks.  Another common characteristic of the system rules design pattern is that the participats in the network can be widely distributed across very heterogeneous business ownership boundaries, legal governance  structures and technical security domains.  Yet, the parties need not agree to conform all or most aspects of their basic roles, relationships and activities in order to connect to  to systems of a trust network.  Cross-domain trusted systems must, by their nature, focus mandatory and enforceable rules narrowly upon the critical items that must be commonly agreed in order for that network to achieve it's purpose.  

For example, institutions participating in credit card and automated clearinghouse debit transactional networks are subject to profoundly different sets of regulations, business practices, economic conditions and social expectations.  The network rules focus upon the topmost agreed items affecting interoperability, reciprocity, risk and revenue allocation.  The knowledge that fundamental rules are subject to enforcement actions is one of the foundations of trust as well as a motivation to prevent or address violations before they trigger penalties.  A clear example of this approach can be found with the Visa Operating Rules, covering a vast global real-time network of parties that agree to rules governing their roles in the system as merchants, banks, transaction processors, individual or business card holders and other key system roles.  

A system like this has made the interbank money transfer system among the safest systems in the world and the daily backbone for exchanges of trillions of dollars, but until recently such systems were only for the `big guys’. To give individuals a similarly safe method of managing personal data, the Human Dynamics research group here at MIT, in partnership with the Institute for Data Driven Design, co-founded by John Clippinger and one author (Pentland), have helped build openPDS  (open Personal Data Store) [fn: See http://openPDS.media.mit.edu for project information and https://github.com/HumanDynamics/openPDS for the open source code].  The openPDS system is a consumer version of a personal cloud trust network and we are now testing it with a variety of industry and government partners. Soon, sharing your personal data could become as safe and secure as transferring money between banks.

[FN: The Human Dynamics Lab has applied the system rules approach to development of integrated business, technical architecture and rules large scale institutional use of personal data stores, available as an example under MIT's creative commons license by MIT, at: github.com/HumanDynamics/SystemRules and the Institute for Data Driven Design has published a guiding vision of digital common law, describing how these concepts can form the basis of next generation legal systems, available at: idcubed.org/??]

The capacity to apply the appropriate methods of enforcement for a trust network depend upon a clear understanding and agreement among parties about the purpose of the trusted system and the respective roles or expectations of those connecting is as participants.  Therefor, an anchor is needed to a clear context of a big data operational framework and institutional controls appropriate for access and confidentiality or privacy.  The following section posits the trust model and signature traits of such a context, through the lens of the New Deal on Data. 

#*# 

Essential Elements of the New Deal of Data

To realize the promise and prospects of Big Data, and to avoid the associated privacy perils, we need a balanced set of institutional controls. Theses controls must support and reflect a greater user control over personal data, as well as large scale interoperability for data sharing between and among institutions. 

The core capabilities of theses controls should include responsive rule-based systems governance and fine grained authorizations for distributed rights management.

Our lives are embedded within institutions.  
We are citizens of countries and cities, receive services from telecom operators, and search for things to buy in online stores.  Almost any action we perform generates data, and those recordings of our lives are an important part of the Big Data promise. The data are not curated by us, but are collected `as is' - and reflect our lives.

Today, all the data people generate in the context of institutions are stored in closed silos.  Mobility traces, for example, are owned by the phone providers, while musical preferences are stored and used by music services.

For these data to be useful to society, the silos must be opened, and the data must be used far more often than they are today. If access to data for the purpose of creating value---either for the user or the society---is very limited, it does not matter how big the data is.  The value of the data lies not just in the fact that they exist.  Rather, it is the knowledge, understanding, and wisdom we gain from them that makes the data valuable.  It is an even bigger challenge to open up the data from multiple silos.  Accessing the multi-faced data, which exist under multiple jurisdictions, about people may be prohibitively difficult. Silos are hard to crack open. Such data, not just Big but Deep, covering multiple facets of a person's life, may be invaluable for research.

Recently, we have shown how challenging, but also possible, it is to open such institutional Big Data.  In the Data For Development (D4D) Challenge~\footnote{http://www.d4d.orange.com/home}, the telecom operator Orange opened access to a large dataset of call detail records (CDRs) from the Ivory Coast.  Working with the data as part of a challenge, teams of researchers came up with life-changing insights for the country.   The privacy of the people was protected not only by the technical means, such as removal of the Personally Identifiable Information (PIIs), but also by legal means, with the researchers signing an agreement they will not use the data for evil.  As we have seen in several cases, such as the Netflix Prize privacy disaster~\cite{narayanan2008robust} and other similar privacy breaches~\cite{sweeney2000simple}, true anonymization is extremely hard.  Some of the weight of privacy protection must rest on the legal framework.

Opening data from the silos by publishing static datasets is important, but it is only the first step.   We can do even more important things when the data is available in real time and can become part of a nervous system of a society.  Epidemics and traffic congestions can be monitored and prevented in real time, underpferoming students can be helped, and people with health risks can be treated before they get sick.  The same data can be used for stalking, burglarizing one's home, and as a reason to charge people more for an insurance policy.

In the Unique in the Crowd project~\cite{de2013unique}, we have shown that even though human beings are highly predictable~\cite{song2010limits}, we are also very unique.  Having access to one dataset, it is easy to uniquely fingerprint someone based on just few datapoints, and use this fingerprint to discover their true identity.   The higher the resolution of the data, the better the data, the easier it gets.

The question of privacy in this context effectively becomes a question of control:   
* Who can release the data of one's movements?  
* To whom?   
* How much and how often?  
* The data are collected by the institution.  
* The data are about people and do not belong to them, they may not even be aware that they exist.  
* People cannot decide upon them, cannot review them.  
* People cannot delete them.  
* Very few parties can use the data, even if people wanted them to.

For systems to be truly data driven and capable of transitioning to the networked and highly dynamic assumptions of a big data economy, the key agreements reflected in trust networks must reflect a new deal. The operating frameworks successful institutions are capable of balancing interests in access, confidentiality and every day reliance upon big data including personal and other sensitive information.  The institutional controls relevant to achieve, maintain and appropriately adapt these balances support and reflect adherence to the fair information practices.  

[Footnote: HEW Report, OECD rendition, EU Directive, DHS/NSTIC version, MGL FIPA and culminating in New Deal on Data adaptation].


Within the existing legal frameworks, it is possible to change the vantage point of the data ownership and put the user, the entity about whom the data are, in control.  It may be a copy of the data living in the great silo, which is being given to the user.  The user would become the owner of their copy of the data, or whenever possible the original, in the old Common Law sense with the right to use, transfer, and delete the data.   An example of such a mechanism in an institutional context is Blue Button initiative~\footnote{http://www.healthit.gov/bluebutton}, where the patients can get a copy of their health records.  Once the copy is with the user, they can do with it as they wish: give it to someone, make it public, do research on it, destroy it.

The users can accumulate data about themselves from multiple sources.   Information on healthcare records, mobility patterns, favorite movies, etc., all belong to the user and can be accessed based on their authorization.  This changes how and what data that can be obtained for the purpose of research and providing services.  Rather than gaining access to the movements of millions of people from a telcom operator, one can potentially gain access to a smaller number but of much richer datasets describing the users from the mobility, health, shopping  perspectives.  New startups do not have to build the user profile from scratch, but can jump in offering competitive services based on the user's collected data.  Users can immediately get better services, using their data in new places.

The first, operational challenge of moving towards the end-user data ownership on a large scale, is to create an ecosystem where such user-owned data are noticed and accessed.  We are currently embedded in a feudal framework: Facebook owns the data generated by and about their users, and provides the access to them to the 3rd parties that user might or might have not authorized.   It is reasonably easy for users to download all their data from Facebook.   It is reasonably easy to put it on Dropbox or even create myself-API, becoming a self-hosted API to one's own personal data.   The challenge is to have clients to talk to this API and provide services, rather than going to Facebook for one's data.   Today, virtually no-one is ready to access user data directly from the user.   We have done a slightly better on the Internet scale with identity: one can deploy own OpenID server fairly easily, and many services will allow the user to sign in. We should be heading in the same direction with data.

Transitioning End-User Assent Practices for App Licenses and Service Agreements 

The way the user grants authorizations to the data she owns is not a trivial matter.  Just answering the very simple question 'Who is authorized to know what city I am in today' may be a challenge.  The 'Yes' the user has clicked so many times has given access to the location data to so many services.  Every tweet, every geo-tagged picture, and every check-in provides the user's location not only to the primary service, but also to all the applications that have been authorized to access these data.  This flow of information was a crucial part of the Web2.0 revolution, with RESTful APIs, mashups, and authorizations.  The complexity of the flow became too large for a user to handle and manage.

Increasing the amount of data the user controls and increasing the granularity of the control is meaningless if this control cannot be exercised in an informed way.  The EULA-catastrophe, where the users may be just as well giving up their soul when signing up without reading, will not bring us closer to the New Deal on Data.  In the end it must the be user that makes the informed decision about who will be authorized to access the data and for what purpose.   Making the authorization interface too complex is a failure, preventing the user from understanding her decisions.   Making it too simple, is also a failure, as it will not convey the complexity of the privacy-related decisions.   Writing it in complex legal language makes it very hard to claim that the user expresses informed consent.   And if we start asking the users for authorization every 5 minutes, it will only train them to press 'Yes' every time a pop-up is presented. 

In addition to the data ownership, we need a better way for the end-user to control what happens with, now their, data.   Will users realize that clicking a single 'Yes' gives a service a second-resolution location data?   And what can be inferred from such data, regarding alcohol abuse ('we see you a lot in a liquor store'), driving habits, not enough exercise. 

This gap between the interface, the single click, and the effect, can render the data ownership meaningless if that click wrenches people and their data into systems and rules that are antithetical to fair information practices, such as is prevalent with todays end user licenses, cloud service and app user agreements. Managing the potentially long term and opposite dynamics fueled by old deal systems operating simultaneously with new deal systems is an important design and migration challenge during the transition to a big data economy. Ironically, some approaches to offering personalized data access by individual approval in secure context, would take the power over the data back out of the hands of the approving users. The sames types of system rules that can and should reflect fair information practices in order to build a sustainable big data operational framework can also be abused to expropriate user's personal data.  The so-called walled garden comprising the interior of a trust network can protect personal data within it's context as a big data sanctuary or it can keep data owners and others with legitimate interests in data away from knowledge or consent for ever after.  Walled-gardens comprised of networks of openPDS friendly operating environments can enable a new data economy or can be used as secret dens to hide and sell personal data. The cost of permitting backward looking industrial era practices better suited to keeping a secret formula in a safe are high.  It's time to look forward, and embracing the relevant institutional controls is one actionable method gain deeper benefits of truly networked data today and accelerate emergence of a transformatively better era of big data.  

There are several potential paths for institutional controls to eventually work in concert across many systems and enterprises and interoperating networks until a stable general environment for big data can be relied upon. For instance, one or a few regulated sectors of the economy could organize and in effect "get ahead" of prescriptive privacy and other legislation by self-regulating, in effect, by way of contractually based system rules.  Or bottom up networks of apps, web services and perhaps diagonal chains of transactions, such as permission based automatic forms filling, could emerge and take hold as a beach head, eventually merging with others.  Consumer, privacy or state/local policy maker groups could catalyze a national wave of adoption covering a horizontal type of data (perhaps location or identity data) or specific types of transactions could be first to cross the big data chasm and become broadly adopted safe-zones eventually merging with others and comprising most and then all of the data systems.  However, when hubs of centralized systems operating outside a New Deal on Data rather than decentralized systems such as openPDS and other personal cloud services exist simultaneously and can arrogate the key rights to user's data in one fell click, there is a risk to smooth and timely transition.    

Now, and during the transition to a big data economy and after the new deal on data is no longer new, personal data must continue to flow in order to be useful.  Protecting the data of people outside of a domain of the user is very hard without a combination of cost effective and useful business practices, legal rules and technical solutions.  For these reasons, the Human Dynamics Lab has focused upon and collaborated with partners to support the clarification of business, legal and technical short and longer term viable solutions.  The World Economic Forum's thought leadership is an excellent example of how all levels of the economy are shining light upon the path to adoption of a New Deal on Data as way of avoiding uncertainty, catalyzing further innovation and a path to dynamic prosperous marketplaces fueled by big data.  The Identity Ecosystem Steering Committee has likewise been a beacon on the policy front, demonstrating how fair information practices can form the bedrock of privately adopted operating rules and trust frameworks for identity sharing across all sectors of the economy, all types of business and all individuals of the population

[Footnote: WEF Relevant papers and blog posts, etc.  NSTIC strategy document and IDESG RoA.  Not sure best example for the various technical approaches being pursued... perhaps W3C work, or Kerberos/OIDC or something else that is hand-in-glove with openPDS approach?]

The Role of Meaningful Individual Consent 

Informed consent is a much better than consumer website and app click-wrap as a starting place for the types of practices for institutions to embrace and ensure during the transition period to a big data economy.  The basic legal rule governing contractual agreement for consumers operating in commercial environments online today simply requires that the user click something or take an affirmative actions and be on notice of and have an opportunity to review the terms of contracts.  There is no general rule requiring users actually be informed of the terms of contracts they are agreeing to (and for the most part will be subject to) when or before they click to install an app or use a web-based service.  By contrast, informed consent does require that a person be informed of the key terms and that they actually understand them before their agreement can be valid.  This can be an electronic process and the Human Dynamics Lab has several working examples that are currently in use by partner institutions and users of operPDS and related systems.  These methods form an important part of how people can and will play a meaningful role in the transition to a big data economy and how institutions can leverage well established practices to ensure agreements regarding use of personal and other sensitive data rests  upon firm and enduring foundations.  

[Footnote to GitHub Repo and DTU current practices and legal blog posts on innovative IRB practices]

There is a need for Living Informed Consent, where the interface for the user to grant the authorizations is made to give the user understanding of the consequences, benefits and dangers of the granted authorizations.  This understanding will never be perfect, but aligning what user understands about their decisions with the reality is the goal of the Living Informed Consent concept. 

We envision several ways the Living Informed Consent can improve user's understanding of the authorizations she is granting.   The underlaying principle is that the status of the authorizations expressed via the interface (website, application) is the contract.  By pressing the buttons, the user initiates technical actions (for example creation of OAuth2 tokens), but also changes her business and legal relation with the service.  Such single screen, with a timestamped log constitutes a history of the consent.   The granularity of offered control may differ, and some actions may or may not be permitted within give institution, agreement, or service.  Still, at any point in time, the user is in certain relation with the service, in the Business, Legal, and Technical domains.   The consent only makes sense when the user understands what she is consenting to.  Why even bother asking otherwise.

Part of the gestalt is to provide concise description of the authorizations written in plain English.  The expression of those authorizations may not always be trivial and may sometime turn into paragraphs of text, yet still the goal should be to provide a description comprehensible for the target audience.  Additionally, the goal should be not only to ask for the access to data, but also include the purpose of the access.  Location is a type of data.  Using location to provide personalized music and using location to increase my insurance for careless driving are two very different authorizations.  Current authorizations frameworks do not really handle on the purpose part, focusing mainly on the data being access, no the reason for access.  This is suboptimal from the user perspective. 

Where the authorizations are granted, one possible way to make it easier for the user to understand what is happening with the data, is to reduce the dimensionality of the data already in the user-controlled domain, and only send high-level answers to the service requesting them.

A lot can be inferred from a raw location trace.  The moment the raw data leaves the user-controlled domain, it can be used for many things, some of them the user may have never thought about, and could not possibly have expressed informed consent.

Extracting the high-level features of the data on the user side, as described in the openPDS framework, should allow for more informed decisions regarding the data access.  All the raw data should not run wildly with every service providing a minuscule service to the user.

It is much easier to control what can happen and thus what are the consequences of disclosing the city you live in versus all your location updates from the last year.  It is not a perfect solution; even low-dimensionality data can still be used for evil and can be correlated with other sources.  It is however a big step in the right direction, for the user to decide upon disclosing how much liqueur she buys per week versus this information being inferred from the GPS trace provided to a service in exchange for personalized music.  When the control over the data access is given to the user together with the tools to reduce the dimensionality, it becomes less important what data are being collected, only hat is disclosed to the external services.  The user's personal data store becomes a 'master copy' of the data, containing all the possible data points.  The user then controls what answers regarding these data are shown to the world.

In addition, the information about data access and usage needs to be an integral part of Living Informed Consent.  How often do services sample user's location?  Are they tracking her in real-time, or do they access the data on a weekly basis?   Is the user singled out in how much data is queried, or is it the same for all the users?  For the user, being able to answer those questions in a simple, even casual way, is crucial for remaining in the state of Living Informed Consent.  Authorizations should not be of 'fire and forget' kind, instead they should be re-evaluated in some orderly fashion.  How often this should happen depends on multiple factors, including the sensitivity of the data accessed, reputation of the service, user preferences, the balance between control and annoyance. 

Giving the data ownership to the end-user makes it easier for the institutions to facilitate the data use.  As the users are the fully-empowered parties to make decisions about authorizing access to all their data, multiple silos do not have to be visited and contracts between them made.  It is sufficient to talk to the end-user to gain access to all the data about her.  This way, the institutions can facilities the data use becoming a matchmaking service for data access rather than data handlers, simplifying their process, while still potentially benefiting from being the 'data directory'.

A crucial component for realizing this vision is the identity of the user:  
* It must be possible for multiple institutions to find the user to give the data to.  
* It must be possible for the user to identify multiple institutions and see where the data is coming from.  
* It must be easier than remembering passwords and logging in separately to every service.  All the questions we have asked so far about the data (who owns, who controls, who decides, who accesses) must have the 'who' component addressed.

Just as the data of the user should live under single control of this user, the identity should also be brought closer to user control.  It does not necessarily mean every user should be their own identity provider, but rather than having hundreds of accounts in multiple services that do not interoperate or know about each other, the identity of the user should be build on the principle of federated identity, where the services allow the user to choose their identity provider.  In addition, just like data, certain attributes of identity need to be protected.  Service does not need to know the user's email address to be able to log the user in, a pseudonym (random but consistent string) is sufficient.  If such service has a valid reason for asking for the users address, it should be based on the users grant of authorization.  Authorization can be revoked and monitored.

In the existing system it is often hard to introduce user data ownership.  This may be due to technical reasons, such as building the infrastructure to provide the space for the data.  It may be for business or legal reasons where the data is considered not suitable for sharing.  It may be for the lack of a clear incentive as to why to do it, or how to interact with the users during the process of introduction and afterwards.  We feel the first step in introducing more privacy into such system is the notion the user must be entitled to at least know about the existence of the data about her.  The right to know about the data existence is hard to deny. It can be realized more smoothly than the transfer of the actual data.  It can be the first step towards The New Deal on Data, enforced by a legal framework.  

openPDS: Implementing the New Deal on Data

The openPDS software is a reference technical implementation of all institutional and legal controls mandated by the New Deal on Data.  It provides a repository for storing personal data, as well as a system for user-controlled access to this personal data.  Such an implementation can, and indeed should, be based on contemporary internet standards.  To this end, openPDS builds on top of well-defined technologies, such as OpenID for identity management and OAuth 2.0 for resource authorization management.  It extends these standards in key ways to facilitate compliance with the New Deal on Data.

Federated Identity Management

OpenID is an open standard that allows user authentication by co-operating sites via a third party service, known as an OpenID server.  While openPDS acts as a personal OpenID server, it allows login with a multitude of disparate identity services.  It builds on top of the OpenID standard to allow association of any number of digital identities with a proxy OpenID managed and stored on the user's personal data store.  This identity can be used to log into the PDS as well as any internet service that accepts OpenID credentials. 

Personal Data Access Control

OpenPDS provides an interface for users to authorize access to their personal data for third parties.  To achieve this, it builds on top of OAuth 2.0; an open standard for authorization.  OAuth allows institutions to specify scopes, which act as identifiers for the type of information the institution might request access to.  For example, a scope might exist that provides access to read a user's email address, or gives the third party institution access to read and write posts on a user's twitter feed.  When a user authorizes the third party institution to access their data in the manner associated with the specified scopes, the OAuth server provides the third party with a token; a string of characters the third party must provide whenever accessing data associated with the approved scopes.

OpenPDS extends OAuth to provide additional dimensions for users to control access to their personal data.  First, it requires a purpose to be provided in addition to a scope for all approved OAuth tokens.  Purpose is a detailed explanation of why the third party desires access to the data associated with the scope, as well as the operations they intend to perform on this data.  Second, openPDS provides a rule engine for associating tokens with more fine-grained access control mechanisms, such as geo-fencing.  A user may utilize this engine to specify a number of additional conditions that must be met in order for the access to be authorized.  For example, these two extensions can be combined to allow controlled access to a user's location data (specified by a scope), for the purpose of identifying whether the user attended a meeting, only while the user is present at their office during business hours.

In order to enforce access to data only for the intended purpose, a compute engine resides within openPDS and is a trusted space for operations to run against raw personal data.  In this manner, to get at the data associated with a given scope and purpose, an institution must submit the code detailing the operations to perform on the user's raw data.  This code acts as a question from the third party to the user's PDS and runs within the compute engine to construct a privacy-preserving answer based from the raw data contained within the PDS.  By disallowing access to the raw data by third parties and enforcing only ansawers to approved questions about this raw data, openPDS provides a strong data ownership and access control mechanism consistent with the New Deal on Data. 

Systems and Rules 

Data literally exists within systems.  Specifically, business systems, legal systems and technical systems are the key types needed to understand the operational framework of networked data.  When it comes to data intended to be accessible over networks – whether big, personal or otherwise – the traditional container of an institution makes less and less sense.   Institutional controls apply, by definition by or to some type of institutional entity such as a business, governmental or religious organization.  A combined view of the business, legal and technical facts and circumstances surrounding big data is necessary to know what access, confidentiality and other expectations exist.  The relevant contextual aspects of big data of one institutional is often profoundly different from that of another.   As more and more organizations use and rely upon big data, a single formula for institutional controls will not work for increasingly heterogeneous business, legal and technical environments in play.  

Looking at an institution as a “system” is one effective approach for dealing with the inherent complexity of managing heterogeneous and distributed networks of actors and interactions.  

Once a systems view is adopted, there is a tractable starting point to narrow or broaden the scope of view to see the smaller and larger systems and to make better and more effective use and control of big data.  Within a given institution, there may in fact be many different discernable institutions and corresponding systems and any given system of one institution will frequently in fact exist across many different discernable institutions.  However, defining the thing to which institutional controls must operate as a system provides an achievable and measurable basis for balancing privacy, access and other interests in big data.  

Systems of Systems

The same forces that are making it nearly impossible to enumerate, track and control data shared over networks are also blurring the boundaries and very definition of institutions.  Large organizations are hardly recognizable as a single entity to start with.  The divisions, subsidiaries, departments and other parts of large organizations are often tantamount to independent institutions.  Sometimes the divergent nature of parts is the result of mergers or acquisitions and consequent legacy systems not yet or ever fully integrated to rest of the firm.  In fact, it is very common for top decision makers to deliberately reject system re-use or compatibility in favor internally non-interoperable systems that will nonetheless provide a cost, quality or other business advantage in a specific competitive marketplace.  

Big and complex enterprise systems are themselves part of one or more larger “enterprise” system.  The module for on-boarding a newly hired employee to an organization may be part of a human resources department integrated enterprise system, or may be part of an identity management enterprise system or a financial management system or any number or other systems and in any combination.  

Meanwhile, as these systems generate data, they are individually and together the birth events and original dwelling places of big data.  And the big data operates in direct sync with the business, legal and technical dimensions of the environments in which is was created and later resides.  From a business vantage point, it is the combination of team, resources and processes of a variety of organizations that comprise a given product or service.  As more businesses rely upon the use of deeply integrated API’s and orchestrated series of services from many disparate sources, there may soon be no discernable “institution” upon which to exercise meaningful controls.  

From the information technology vantage point, what once was a simple “corporate network” is now frequently an “extended enterprise” enabling the integration of many sets of functional capabilities and operations with a wide variety of external organizations.  From the business perspective, it is common for important services, core components and even whole networks of an organization to exist completely outside the ownership, control or detailed knowledge of that organization.  The same basic trend plays out accordingly from a legal perspective.  A composite of partner agreements, exchange network operating rules, supply chain terms, outsourced provider contracts, cloud based service licenses and a wide variety of other legal instruments and methods reflect and support the distributed nature of enterprises today. 

Key Contextual Aspects of Systems

There are a handful of key aspects of the operational framework for any given system from which practical approaches to confidentiality and data access can be selected.  Those contextual aspects are:

1. A definite number and type of applications, services, platforms, infrastructure and other parts of the system;
2. A definite number of organizations and humans that have operational roles (e.g. administrator access, user accounts and other access rights), ownership and/or management roles for one or more parts of the system;
3. A definite set of data that exists in, among or is passes through one or more part of the system; and
4. A definite set of interactions, transactions and other actions conducted in, with, through or by one or more parts of the system.  

By establishing just a few of the above relevant aspects of a big data system, it is possible to establish applicable business contexts, legal requirements and technical capabilities necessary to predict and control privacy, access and other outcomes.

To some extent, any one of a system’s contextual aspects enumerated above blur with other aspects. For example, when the transaction being conducted is “credit card authorization” then the data-sets can be deduced from the relevant transaction type (which specifies that particular data be transmitted in a particular format and method, including such things as the identity of the card holder, the merchant, the acquiring bang, the issuing bank, the transaction processor, the dollar amount requested for authorization, and so on).  

Similarly, knowing the answer to item #1 (e.g. the applications, services and hardware) of a given system can itself establish a lot of the other enumerated contextual aspects above.  For instance, if the big data arises from an “air traffic control” system for a given United States commercial airport, then large sets of expected roles can be deduced (e.g. airlines, pilots, ground crew, municipal regulators, approved auditors, etc).  

Furthermore, one can determine conclusively  the exact parties conducting each such role for any given periods of time (i.e. the names and addresses of each relevant airline, pilot, mayor, etc).  In this way, otherwise imponderable but pivotal factors are rendered tractable, such as what professional or fiduciary duties of care apply to a given party which may require or prohibit the sharing of a particular set of data, or whether a party has perhaps consented to the release of otherwise protected data.  

The sub-parts of these components will frequently correspond to different sets of expectations for data access, confidentiality and other outcomes, precisely because various subparts have different parties, interactions, rules, and other knowable context enumerated above. Consider that the part of a system comprising “Ground Movement Control” applies to vehicles, interactions, parties, etc that differ materially from “Terminal Radar Approach Control” and so on for many parts of the system, and therefore respective expectations for data access and confidentiality will correspond accordingly. And yet, the applicable rules, relevant parties, specific data, particular interactions and other key aspects can be definitely established for any part or for the entire system at any point in time. 

The controls applied by or to any given governmental, corporate or other “institution” may be profoundly inadequate to guess how confidentiality and data access do apply or could be structured to apply to big data running through that organization.  Because each of the enumerated contextual system aspects can be known for a system at any given time, therefore a rational and reliable basis exists to establish confidentiality, data access and other important questions related to the big data of that system.  Seeing the surrounding context of big data through the lens of systems affords a realistic and actionable premise to develop and deploy workable controls and reasonable expectations with respect to big data.  

System Rules and Interlateral Agreements

The rules governing systems are perhaps the more important lever of institutional control for big data.  Especially when large, complex systems comprised of smaller or overlapping systems crossing business boundaries are in play, it is the system rules agreed by al parties that actually define, bound and govern the expectations about data and it’s uses.  

An example of multi-party system rules is…

From a legal vantage point, asking what actions with big data are being conducted by which parties can enable a lawyer to determine the applicable laws or other rules.  A definite set of rules applicable to one or more parts of the system, including statutes, regulations, judicial holdings, corporate policies, contractual or license provisions, accreditation or certification obligations and other rules;  

Some controls will have to be applied by and to many different institutions in order to prevent leakage and to achieve predictable results.  To address privacy and data access, a variety of institutional controls will be needed, and in varied combinations with engineering and other controls.  Establishing an appropriate set of institutional controls will depend upon such factors as the type of institution using big data, what big data being used, how it is used, who is using it, and when it is used.  

[under development]


Integrated Data, Identity and Authorization Services

[Under Development]

Institutional IT Governance and Change Management

[Under Development]

Benchmark Scenarios

Supporting the effective development of institutional controls for big data requires an understanding of how to define and work with the applicable context surrounding the scenarios within which the big data exists.  In particular, the New Deal on Data will require a set of Institutional Controls involving governance, business, legal and technical aspects that are knowable only with reference to the relevant context of a factually based scenario of use.  The following scenarios demonstrate signature features of the New Deal on Data in various contexts and serve as an anchor to evaluate what Institutional Controls are well aligned.  

1. Research Systems
Scenario: Computational Social Science Research Studies

Computational Social Science (CSS) studies are based on data collected often with an extremely high resolution and scale. Using computational power combined with mathematical models, such data can be used to provide insights into human nature. Much of the data collected, for example mobility traces are sensitive and private; most individuals would feel uncomfortable sharing them publicly. The need for solutions to ensure the privacy of the individuals has grown alongside the data collection efforts. 

The data collection in the CSS context is based on the informed consent of the participants. Countries have different bodies regulating such studies, for example Institutional Research Boards (IRBs) in the US. Although certain minimal requirements for implementing informed consent exist[TODO: reference], they are often not very well suited for the large-scale studies, where the amount and sensitivity of the data calls for sophisticated privacy controls. As the scale of the studies grows, in terms of the number of participants, collected bits per user, and duration, the EULA-style informed consent is no longer sufficient and makes it hard to claim that participants in fact expressed informed consent.

This year we have deployed a 1,000 phones study at Technical University of Denmark, where we handed out mobile phones to freshmen students in order to study their networks and social behavior in the important change moment of their lives, when they join the university. The study, called SensibleDTU, uses not only data collected from the mobile phones (location, Bluetooth-based proximity, call and sms logs etc.) but also data collected from social networks, questionnaires filled out by participants, behavior in economic games and so on. As the data is collected in the context of the university, there is potentially a big issues of students feeling obliged to participate in the study, feeling that their grades may depend on it, or that the data may influence their grades. In this context, we see the implementation of Living Informed Consent not only as a technical mean to put participants in control of the data we collect, but also to convey the message about the opt-in nature of the study, the boundaries of the data usage, and parties accessing the data.

It is not feasible to explain the terms and answer all the questions to all 1,000 students personally. The controls must be self-explanatory as much as possible, and guide the user from the first opening of the link to the study to the grant of the authorizations. At the same time, every click made by the user, should be an expression of an informed decision, so the user journey must be a balance of guidance and understanding. For this reason we have created a set of web applications, allowing the users to enroll into the study, express informed consent, and interact with their data. 

As the study will last for several years, hopefully allowing us to see the life of a student from the very first friendships made until the graduation party, the consent must remain alive. It is again a matter of balance: we do not want the participants to feel under constant surveillance (as they are not, the data is used mostly in aggregated form), at the same time to remember that in fact, the data is being collected and used. We are still trying to understand how to achieve this equilibrium: how often should we remind the users about the collection effort? should they re-authorize applications from time to time? We see a great hope in the applications we create for the users to provide certain services, simple such as life-logging where they can see how active they are, what are their top places etc. and more advanced, such as artistic visualizations of their social networks. Making the user aware of the data by transforming them into value, can greatly benefit the privacy, making users constantly aware what is being collected, but also what kind of value they can get out of it. 

When a study of such scale is deployed, the particular experiments and sub-studies may not be exactly defined from the very beginning. The initial deployment is a creation of a testbed, where shorter or longer experiments can take place; for example part of the population may participate in the experiment of quantifying the impact of feedback application on their activity levels. Being able to create such experiments in an efficient way is a huge value for the researchers. To do that in the most frictionless way, we give the users the choice to opt-in to those additional experiments, providing some financial or other benefits. This is only possible if there is a notion of identity of the participants, stronger and more useful than a piece of paper with a signature. This identity allows us to reach out to people, offer them additional experiments, and let them agree or disagree to them.

This touches upon the re-usability of data, as the new experiments may require additional data to be collected, but also have access to all the existing data, based on user authorization. We can imagine going even further, where entirely different studies can re-use participants data from a previous study based on their authorization. When the data are owned buy the users, they are free to authorize access to them to any party that requests it. We can see a New Deal on Data pattern here: rather than services (studies) talking to each other about the user data, they talk directly to the users, seeking their authorization. This can address a very important problem in the research context, the data re-use in a privacy-aware manner. Rather than publishing a static dataset, where the users have lost control over their data, live and fresh data can be continuously accessed by any study that the user agrees to be a part of.

Many studies will be willing to offer money or other value for the access to the data. Other will provide the user the opportunity to have new data collected. This way, the data collection becomes an opportunity for the user to enrich their personal dataset, and to benefit from it in the future. Join our study and we will provide you with a smartphone and collect your movement patterns for a year; we will do science and you will gain new data that can get you better value or deals in different services. You may now be eligible for a different study. Or your music recommendation may get better, because your music service can make a use of this extra data. Your data.

2. Educational Systems

3. Government Systems 

4. Healthcare Systems 

[Pending]

5. Commerce Systems

[Pending]

Future Research 

Our traditional methods of testing and improving government, organizations, and so on are of limited use in building a data driven society. Even the scientific method as we normally use it no longer works, because there are so many potential connections that our standard statistical tools generate nonsense results.

The reason is that with such rich data, you can easily uncover misleading correlations. For instance, let’s imagine we discover that people who are unusually active are more likely to get the flu. This is a real example: when we examined the minute-by-minute behavior of a small university community – a real-time flow of gigabytes per day for an entire year – we noticed that an unusual level of running around often predicted onset of the flu. But if we can only analyze the data using traditional statistical methods, we have the problem of why is it true? Is it because flu virus makes us more active in order to spread itself more quickly? Or did interacting with many more people than usual make you more likely to catch the flu? Or is it something else? From the real-time stream of data by itself you just can’t know. 


The point here is that normal analysis methods don't suffice to answer these sorts of questions, because we don’t know all the possible alternatives and so we can’t form a limited, testable number of clear hypotheses. Instead, we need to devise new ways to test the causality of connections in the real world. We can no longer rely on laboratory experiments; we need to actually do the experiments in the real world, and usually on massive, real-time streams of data.

Using massive, live data to design institutions and policies is outside of our normal way of managing things. We live in an era that builds on centuries of science and engineering, and the standard choices for improving systems, governments, organizations, and so on are fairly well understood. Therefore our scientific experiments normally need only consider a few clear alternatives (i.e., ‘plausible hypotheses’).  

But with the coming of big data, we are going to be operating very much out of our old, familiar ballpark. These data are often indirect and noisy, and so interpretation of the data requires greater care than is usual. Even more importantly, a great deal of the data is about human behavior, and the questions are ones that seek to connect physical conditions to social outcomes. Until we have a solid, well-proven and quantitative theory of social physics, we won’t be able to formulate and test hypotheses in the way we can when we design bridges or develop new drugs.

Therefore, we must move beyond the closed, laboratory-based question-and-answering process that we currently use and begin to manage our society in a new way. We have to begin to test connections in the real world far earlier and more frequently than we have ever had to do before, using the methods my research group and I have developed for the Friends and Family study or the Social Evolution study. We need to construct Living Laboratories – communities willing to try a new way of doing things or, to put it bluntly, to be guinea pigs – in order to test and prove our ideas. This is new territory and so it is important for us to constantly try out new ideas in the real world in order to see what works and what doesn’t.  

An example of such a Living Lab is the `open data city’  just launched by one author (Pentland) with the city of Trento in Italy, along with Telecom Italia, Telefonica, the research university Fondazione Bruno Kessler, the Institute for Data Driven Design, and local companies. Importantly, this Living Lab has the approval and informed consent of all its participants – they know that they are part of a gigantic experiment whose goal is to invent a better way of living. More detail on this Living Lab can be found at http://www.mobileterritoriallab.eu/

The goal of this Living Lab is to develop new ways of sharing data to promote greater civic engagement and exploration. One specific goal is to build upon and test trust-network software such as our openPDS (Personal Data Store) system . Tools such as openPDS make it safe for individuals to share personal data (e.g., health data, facts about your children) by controlling where your data go and what is done with them. 

The specific research questions we are exploring depend upon a set of “personal data services” designed to enable users to collect, store, manage, disclose, share and use data about themselves. These data can be used for the personal self-empowerment of each member, or (when aggregated) for the improvement of the community through data commons that enable social network incentives. The ability to share data safely should enable better idea flow among individuals, companies, and government, and we want to see if these tools can in fact increase productivity and creative output at the scale of an entire city.

	An example of an application enabled by the openPDS trust frame work is sharing of best practices among families with young children. How do other families spend their money? How much do they get out and socialize? Which preschools or doctors do people stay with for the longest time? Once the individual gives permission, our openPDS system allows such personal data to be collected, anonymized and shared with other young families safely and automatically. 

	The openPDS system lets the community of young families learn from each other without the work of entering data by hand or the risk of sharing through current social media. While the Trento experiment is still in its early days, the initial reaction from participating families is that these sorts of data sharing capabilities are valuable, and they feel safe sharing their data using the openPDS system.

	The Trento Living Lab will let us investigate how to deal with the sensitivities of collecting and using deeply personal data in real-world situations. In particular, the Lab will be used as a pilot for the New Deal on Data and for new ways to give users control of the use of their personal data. For example, we will explore different techniques and methodologies to protect the users’ privacy while at the same time being able to use these personal data to generate a useful data commons. We will also explore different user interfaces for privacy settings, for configuring the data collected, for the data disclosed to applications and for those shared with other users, all in the context of a trust framework. 


