CUSP book chapter material
Introduction

Sustaining a healthy, safe and efficient society is a scientific and engineering challenge that goes back to the 1800s, when the Industrial Revolution spurred rapid urban growth and created huge social and environ¬mental problems. The remedy then was to build centralized networks that delivered clean water and safe food, enabled commerce, removed waste, provided energy, facilitated trans¬portation and offered access to centralized healthcare, police and educational services. 
But these century-old solutions are increasingly obsolete. We have cities jammed with traffic, world-wide outbreaks of disease that are seemingly unstoppable and political institutions that are deadlocked and unable to act. In addition, we face the challenges of global warming, uncertain energy, water, and food supplies, and a rising population that will require building one thousand new cities of a million people each in order just to stay even.
But it doesn’t have to be this way. We can have cities that are protected from pandemics, that are energy efficient, have secure food and water supplies, and have much better government. To reach these goals, however, we need to radically rethink our approach. Rather than static, fixed systems that are separated by function – water, food, waste, transport, education, energy, and so on – we must consider them as dynamic, data driven systems. Instead of focusing only on access and distribution, we need dynamic, networked, self-regulating systems that are driven by the needs and preferences of the citizens. 
To ensure a sustainable future society, we must use our new technologies to create a `nervous system’ that maintains the stability of government, energy, and public health systems around the globe. Currently, our digital feedback technologies are capable of creating a level of dynamic responsiveness that our larger, more complicated modern society requires. We must reinvent societies’ systems within a control framework: sensing the situation, then combining these observations with models of demand and dynamic reaction, and finally using the resulting predictions to tune the system to match the demands being made of it.  
The engine that will drive this new nervous system is big data: the newly ubiquitous digital data now available about all aspects of human life.   By analyzing patterns of human experience and idea exchange within the `digital breadcrumbs’ that we all leave behind us as we move through the world – call records, credit card transactions, and GPS location fixes, among others. These data tell the story of your life by recording what you have chosen to do. And this is very different than what you put on Facebook; your postings on Facebook are what you choose to tell people, edited according to the standards of the day. Who you actually are is more accurately determined by where you spend your time and which things you buy not just what you say that you do .   
The process of analyzing the patterns within these digital breadcrumbs is called `reality mining’, and through reality mining we can tell an enormous amount about who you are. The Human Dynamics research group at MIT have found that we can use them to tell if you are likely to get diabetes, or whether you are the sort of person who will pay back loans. And by analyzing these patterns across many people, we are discovering that we can begin to explain many things – crashes, revolutions, bubbles – that previously appeared to be random `acts of God’. For this reason the magazine Technology Review named our development of reality mining as one of the ten technologies that will change the world.

The New Deal on Data
The digital breadcrumbs we leave behind provide clues about who we are and what we want. That makes these personal data immensely valuable, both for public goods and for private companies. As European Consumer Commissioner Meglena Kuneva said recently, “Personal data is the new oil of the internet and the new currency of the digital world .” This new ability to see the details of every interaction, however, can be used for good or for ill. Therefore maintaining protection of personal privacy and freedom is critical to our future success as a society.
A successful data driven society must be able to guarantee that our data will not be abused – and perhaps especially that government will not abuse the power conferred by access to such fine-grain data. To achieve the positive possibilities of a data driven society, we require what I have called the New Deal on Data – workable guarantees that the data needed for public goods are readily available while at the same time protecting the citizenry. We must develop much more powerful and sophisticated tools for privacy and reach a consensus that allows us to use personal data to both build a better society and to protect the rights of the average citizen.
 A key insight that motivates the creation of a New Deal on Data is that your data are worth more when shared, because these aggregated data inform improvements in systems such as public health, transportation, and government. For instance, we have demonstrated that data about the way you behave and where you go can be used to minimize the spread of infectious disease.   Our research has reported how we were able to use these digital breadcrumbs to track the spread of influenza from person to person on an individual level. And if you can see it, you can stop it. In this instance, the result of sharing your personal data is that we can build a world where the threat of infectious pandemics is greatly diminished. 
Similarly, if you're worried about global warming, these shared, aggregated data now show us how patterns of mobility relate to productivity. In turn, this provides us with the ability to design cities that are both more productive and at the same time more energy efficient. But in order to be able to obtain these results and make a greener world, you need to be able to see the people moving around; this depends on many people being willing to contribute their data, even if only anonymously and in aggregate. 
While concrete examples such as better health systems and more energy efficient transportation systems motivate a New Deal on Data, there is an even greater public good that can be achieved by efficient and safe data sharing. To enable sharing of personal data and experiences, we also need secure technology and regulation that allow individuals to safely and conveniently share personal information with each other, with corporations, and with government. Consequently, the heart of a New Deal on Data must be to provide both regulatory standards and financial incentives that entice owners to share data while at the same time serving the interests of both individuals and society at large. We must promote greater idea flow among individuals, not just corporations or government departments.
Unfortunately, today most personal data are siloed off in private companies and therefore largely unavailable. Private organizations collect the vast majority of personal data in the form of location patterns, financial transactions, phone and internet communications, and so on. These data must not remain the exclusive domain of private companies, because then the data are less likely to contribute to the common good. Thus, these private organizations must be key players in the New Deal on Data’s framework for privacy and data control. Likewise, these data should not become the exclusive domain of the government, because this will not serve the public interest of transparency and we should be suspicious of trusting the government with such power.
Personal Data: Emergence of a New Asset Class

It has long been recognized that the first step to promoting liquidity in land and commodity markets is to guarantee ownership rights   so that people can safely buy and sell. Similarly, the first step toward creating greater idea and idea flow (`idea liquidity’) is to define ownership rights . The only politically viable course is to give individual citizens rights over data that are about them and in fact, in the European Union these rights flow directly from the constitution. We need to recognize personal data as a valuable asset of the individual that is given to companies and government in return for services .  
The simplest approach to defining what it means to “own your own data” is to draw an analogy with the English common law ownership rights of possession, use, and disposal:

•You have the right to possess data about you. Regard¬less of what entity collects the data, the data belong to you, and you can access your data at any time. Data collec¬tors thus play a role akin to a bank, managing the data on behalf of their “customers.”
•You have the right to full control over the use of your data. The terms of use must be opt-in and clearly ex¬plained in plain language. If you are not happy with the way a company uses your data, you can remove the data, just as you would close your account with a bank that is not providing satisfactory service. 
•You have the right to dispose of or distribute your data. You have the option to have data about you destroyed or re¬deployed elsewhere. 

Individual rights to personal data must be balanced with the need of corporations and governments to use certain data – account activity, billing information, and so on – to run their day-to-day operations. This New Deal on Data therefore gives individuals the right to possess, control, and dispose of copies of these required operational data, along with copies of the incidental data collected about you such as location and similar context. Note that these ownership rights are not exactly the same as literal ownership under modern law, but the practical effect is that disputes are resolved in a different, simpler manner than would be the case for (as an example) land ownership disputes.
In 2007, one of us (Pentland) first proposed the New Deal on Data to the World Economic Forum. Since then, this idea has run through various discussions and eventually helped shape the 2012 Consumer Data Bill of Rights in the United States, along with a matching declaration on Personal Data Rights in the EU. These new regulations hope to accomplish the combined trick of breaking data out of the current silos, thus enabling public goods, while at the same time giving individuals greater control over data about them. But, of course this is still a work in progress and the battle for individual control of personal data rages onward.

Enforcement

How can we enforce this New Deal? The threat of legal action is insufficient, because if you can’t see abuses then you can’t prosecute them. Plus, who wants more lawsuits anyway?
The current best practice is a system of data sharing called trust networks. Trust networks are a combination of a computer network that keeps track of user permissions for each piece of personal data, and a legal contract that specifies both what you can and can’t do with the data and what happens if there is a violation of the permissions. In such a system all personal data have attached labels specifying what the data can, and cannot, be used for. These labels are exactly matched by terms in a legal contract between all the participants stating penalties for not obeying the permission labels and giving the right to audit the use of the data. Having permissions, including the provenance of the data, allows automatic auditing of data use and allows individuals to change their permissions and withdraw data.  
A system like this has made the interbank money transfer system among the safest systems in the world, but until recently such systems were only for the `big guys’. To give individuals a similarly safe method of managing personal data, my research group here at MIT, in partnership with the Institute for Data Driven Design  (co-founded by John Clippinger and myself), have helped build openPDS  (open Personal Data Store), a consumer version of this type of system and we are now testing it with a variety of industry and government partners. Soon, sharing your personal data could become as safe and secure as transferring money between banks.
DOT DOT DOT

Future Research
Our traditional methods of testing and improving government, organizations, and so on are of limited use in building a data driven society. Even the scientific method as we normally use it no longer works, because there are so many potential connections that our standard statistical tools generate nonsense results.
The reason is that with such rich data, you can easily uncover misleading correlations. For instance, let’s imagine we discover that people who are unusually active are more likely to get the flu. This is a real example: when we examined the minute-by-minute behavior of a small university community – a real-time flow of gigabytes per day for an entire year – we noticed that an unusual level of running around often predicted onset of the flu. But if we can only analyze the data using traditional statistical methods, we have the problem of why is it true? Is it because flu virus makes us more active in order to spread itself more quickly? Or did interacting with many more people than usual make you more likely to catch the flu? Or is it something else? From the real-time stream of data by itself you just can’t know. 
The point here is that normal analysis methods don't suffice to answer these sorts of questions, because we don’t know all the possible alternatives and so we can’t form a limited, testable number of clear hypotheses. Instead, we need to devise new ways to test the causality of connections in the real world. We can no longer rely on laboratory experiments; we need to actually do the experiments in the real world, and usually on massive, real-time streams of data.
Using massive, live data to design institutions and policies is outside of our normal way of managing things. We live in an era that builds on centuries of science and engineering, and the standard choices for improving systems, governments, organizations, and so on are fairly well understood. Therefore our scientific experiments normally need only consider a few clear alternatives (i.e., ‘plausible hypotheses’).  
But with the coming of big data, we are going to be operating very much out of our old, familiar ballpark. These data are often indirect and noisy, and so interpretation of the data requires greater care than is usual. Even more importantly, a great deal of the data is about human behavior, and the questions are ones that seek to connect physical conditions to social outcomes. Until we have a solid, well-proven and quantitative theory of social physics, we won’t be able to formulate and test hypotheses in the way we can when we design bridges or develop new drugs.
Therefore, we must move beyond the closed, laboratory-based question-and-answering process that we currently use and begin to manage our society in a new way. We have to begin to test connections in the real world far earlier and more frequently than we have ever had to do before, using the methods my research group and I have developed for the Friends and Family study or the Social Evolution study. We need to construct Living Laboratories – communities willing to try a new way of doing things or, to put it bluntly, to be guinea pigs – in order to test and prove our ideas. This is new territory and so it is important for us to constantly try out new ideas in the real world in order to see what works and what doesn’t.  
An example of such a Living Lab is the `open data city’ I have just launched with the city of Trento in Italy, along with Telecom Italia, Telefonica, the research university Fondazione Bruno Kessler, the Institute for Data Driven Design, and local companies. Importantly, this Living Lab has the approval and informed consent of all its participants – they know that they are part of a gigantic experiment whose goal is to invent a better way of living. More detail on this Living Lab can be found at http://www.mobileterritoriallab.eu/
The goal of this Living Lab is to develop new ways of sharing data to promote greater civic engagement and exploration. One specific goal is to build upon and test trust-network software such as our openPDS (Personal Data Store) system . Tools such as openPDS make it safe for individuals to share personal data (e.g., health data, facts about your children) by controlling where your data go and what is done with them. 
The specific research questions we are exploring depend upon a set of “personal data services” designed to enable users to collect, store, manage, disclose, share and use data about themselves. These data can be used for the personal self-empowerment of each member, or (when aggregated) for the improvement of the community through data commons that enable social network incentives. The ability to share data safely should enable better idea flow among individuals, companies, and government, and we want to see if these tools can in fact increase productivity and creative output at the scale of an entire city.
   An example of an application enabled by the openPDS trust frame work is sharing of best practices among families with young children. How do other families spend their money? How much do they get out and socialize? Which preschools or doctors do people stay with for the longest time? Once the individual gives permission, our openPDS system allows such personal data to be collected, anonymized and shared with other young families safely and automatically. 
	The openPDS system lets the community of young families learn from each other without the work of entering data by hand or the risk of sharing through current social media. While the Trento experiment is still in its early days, the initial reaction from participating families is that these sorts of data sharing capabilities are valuable, and they feel safe sharing their data using the openPDS system.
	The Trento Living Lab will let us investigate how to deal with the sensitivities of collecting and using deeply personal data in real-world situations. In particular, the Lab will be used as a pilot for the New Deal on Data and for new ways to give users control of the use of their personal data. For example, we will explore different techniques and methodologies to protect the users’ privacy while at the same time being able to use these personal data to generate a useful data commons. We will also explore different user interfaces for privacy settings, for configuring the data collected, for the data disclosed to applications and for those shared with other users, all in the context of a trust framework. 

