This page is to develop an overview of the key themes and sections of content for the next draft of the book chapter and allocate sections among the Human Dynamics Lab authors. Below (as of August 1) are the current themes and content and an initial take on which sections and authors might be paired. To propose modified/different themes or sections or to swap current proposed section with other authors, etc, please update this page with comments/questions and/or use issue ticket system for this repo.

The Operational Framework: Institutional Controls

1. The New Realities of Living in a Big Data Society

[Sandy?] Basic drivers and inhibitors

Basic drivers and inhibitors underlying the emergence of big data are discussed. Emergent characteristics and capabilities comprising larger big data trends are explored, including the emergence of location and geo-aware services, harbingers arising in urban and dense network environments, web 2.0 cross-system interoperability, federated identity for intensely personal data services and various major industry and governmental dependencies on sharing of or access to massive distributed sources of data.

[Yves?] Unique in the Crowd:

Problems and prospects for addressing re-identification of aggregate and anonymized data sets;

2. The New Deal on Data

[Arek?] Essential Elements of the New Deal of Data in the Context of Institutional Controls

To realize the promise and prospects of big data and avoid it’s security and confidentiality perils, a balanced set of institutional controls are needed. These institutional controls must support and reflect greater user control over personal data and also large scale interoperability for data sharing between and among institutions. Core capabilities of these controls include responsive rules-based systems governance and fine grained authorizations for distributed rights management.

3. Personal Data Services and The Role of openPDS

[Brian?] openPDS a exemplary implementation

[under development]

[Team?] Emerging marketplace personal data standards, services and products

[under development]

[Thomas?] Identity and User Granted Authorizations

The role of personal data stores and user-centered identity for data sharing services as key components of a broader New Deal on Data approach. From an institutional perspective, the fit of open data components, extended network systems design and cross-boundary federated infrastructures are examined as part of strategic enterprise architecture.

4. The Role of Institutional Enterprise IT Governance and Change Management

[Thomas?] Life-Cycle Industry and Enterprise Adoption of Identity and Data Standards

The example of MIT Kerberos and Internet Trust Consortium's successfull management of the MIT Keberos open source code and standardization by and with large enterprises from a variety of economic sectors and in the public and private sectors is described. The powerful capabilities and potential fit of this model for achieving the New Deal on Data by institutions is explored with reference to a ramp up toward initial adoption, broader migration, continued use and change management. Synergies with longer term strategic planning and target enterprise architecture roadmaps are considered.  

The Role of a CIO, CTO and CISO in managing institutional controls needed for Big Data across the extended-enterprise.



[Dazza?] Leveraging Existing Institutional Oversight and Control Methods

Common institutional audit types are described with emphasis on current emerging trends to reflect data flow and access reporting/compliance from audit assessment criteria standards groups and industry associations or certification bodies. Opportunities to align New Deal on Data functional capabilities with corresponding institutional IT governance, oversight and management controls are explored.

The example of NSTIC/IDESG voluntery multi-stakeholder self organization as a potential source of common approaches to institutional and industry-wide agreement and adoption processes.  

 The IRB evolving approval process, concepts of informed consent, permission-based data-set reusability.  Discussion of how new approaches to flexible longitudinal oversight for computational social science research studies happening with recent FERPA audit and research regulatory reform and IRB modernization can serve in part as a generalizable model of institutional controls and methods. 

5. Benchmark Scenarios and Use Cases

[Team?] Past and Current Use Cases

Common business, legal and technical use cases in mobile communications, financial services, social networking and e-government from the vantage points of individual users, system providers and third party users or service providers.

[Sandy? Team?] Future-State Use Cases With and Without New Deal on Data

The current state of affairs is compared with near and longer term future big data scenarios to highlight the emerging dynamics in play. Common features of post-New Deal on Data modifications or replacement use cases are described and poignant use cases demonstrating dystopic future without a New Deal on Data are contrasted. The pivotal role of openPDS and enshrining user knowledge and consent with respect their own data and personal data about them is demonstrated by the extrapolated contrasting future-state use cases.

6. Research and Development Supporting Strategic Transition and Change Management

[Sandy? Thomas?] Research and Innovation Agenda

Managing the transition to big data systems and identifies needed interdisciplinary research agendas in the computational social science, informatics, economic and political science fields;